Hello everyone and welcome to this lecture on time series basics.
So we're going to begin by having a pretty brief discussion on some important time series concepts mainly
just so we know some keywords that will be using throughout this section of the Course time series data
has particular properties.
So we're going to take a look at just the few plots and discuss some of these important terms.
The first term we're going to discuss is trends.
So time series can have a trend to them.
And here we see just a general time series with three major trends.
We have an upward trend that the beginning a horizontal or stationary trend in the middle and then a
downward trend at the end.
And basically what the trend is describing on average what is the value doing for this time series is
it moving upwards on average is increasing.
So that's the very first part of our time series we can see that on average the value tends to be decreasing
or increasing excuse me than in the middle.
We have a horizontal or stationary trend where the value on average tends to be flat even though there's
variations overall on average in the middle.
It tends to be flat and then towards the tail end of this time series we see on average the mean tends
to be decreasing or we have a downward trend.
So again the trend is just what is happening to the mean value in this time series.
We do see variance for fluctuations if we look at a closer unit of time.
But overall on these larger time periods what is the average doing is a moving upwards is a horizontal
or stationary.
Or is it moving downwards.
The next key term we want to discuss is seasonality.
And basically the seasonality is it's a repeating trend.
So a really common example of this are things that have to do with the actual seasons of a year.
So seasonality often falls upon some sort of yearly cycle or a yearly period.
So here we can see Google Trends if you search for snowboarding you'll see some sort of seasonality
here.
So the general trend tends to be going decreasing.
So we see a little bit of a downward trend.
But if we take a look at the seasonality of this we can see that it's clearly related to the winter
months.
So during the winter months we see a big increase in searches for snowboarding and then during the summer
months we see a large decrease.
Now the general trend here is going down.
But in order to describe these peaks and valleys we use that term seasonality.
So that's what seasonality is and how it's different than just a trend.
So on average there's a very slight decrease there.
So the trending is a little bit downward here because it decreasing but the seasonality is allowing
us to analyze this repetitive trend of during the winter months we see a large increase during the summer
months we see a large decrease.
Then the final term we want to discuss is the cyclical term and cyclical basically just means that there's
trends with no set repetition.
So what that actually means is you can still have trends such as an upward trend or the horizontal trend
or a downward trend.
But it can be a non-repetitive trend.
So previously we saw that snowboarding data that pretty much every year we saw the increase during the
winter decrease during the summer.
But if we look at some stock data such as the S&P 500 here we can see that there's definitely trends
but there's no actual seasonality to them.
It's not like every 10 years we can decide that the stock market will go down sometimes the cycle goes
up sometimes the cycle goes down.
So we can see it there's clearly a trend here but we can't actually pinpoint the season itself.
So we can see from 1995 to 2000 there was a big trend upwards then from 2000 to kind of 2002 ish.
There's that trend downward.
Then it starts going back up.
Then another trend back down as it reaches 2010 but 2008 financial crisis.
Then it goes back up for the next five years or so.
And there's no actual seasonality here.
You can't actually pinpoint where the repetition is happening.
So this is not seasonality.
It's more of a cyclical cycle.
OK.
So we are seeing a few of these key terms we're going to begin to learn about one of the most popular
libraries in Python for handling time series data and it's called stat's models.
So let's go to the next lecture where we discuss and show you some basics of stat's models.